Kustomize deployment instructions (#1202)
minio/docs: source/operations/install-deploy-manage/deploy-operator-kustomize.rst

Prerequisites
-------------

To install the Operator with Kustomize you will need the following:

* An existing Kubernetes cluster, v1.21 or later.
* The ``kubectl`` CLI tool on your local host, the same version as the cluster.
* `Docker <https://docker.com>`__ for your platform.
* Access to run ``kubectl`` commands on the cluster from your local host.

For more about Operator installation requirements, including TLS certificates, see the :ref:`Operator deployment prerequisites <minio-operator-prerequisites>`.

This procedure assumes familiarity with the referenced Kubernetes concepts and utilities.
While this documentation may provide guidance for configuring or deploying Kubernetes-related resources on a best-effort basis, it is not a replacement for the official :kube-docs:`Kubernetes Documentation <>`.

.. _minio-k8s-deploy-operator-kustomize-repo:

Install the MinIO Operator using Kustomize
------------------------------------------

The following procedure uses ``kubectl --kustomize`` to install the Operator from the MinIO Operator GitHub repository:

.. important::

   Do not use ``kubectl krew`` or similar methods to update or manage the MinIO Operator installation.

>    If you use Kustomize to install the Operator, you must use Kustomize to manage that installation.

Author: Oh yes. I might even change it where I lifted that text from as well.

#. Install the latest version of Operator

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable
      :substitutions:

>       kubectl apply -k github.com/minio/operator\?ref=|operator-version-stable|

Author: Sometimes we've gotten this warning while testing, although the command seems to succeed after that. What causes it? Is this something we need to cover?
```
kubectl apply -k github.com/minio/operator\?ref=v5.0.14
namespace/minio-operator created
Warning: resource customresourcedefinitions/miniojobs.job.min.io is missing the kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration annotation which is required by kubectl apply. kubectl apply should only be used on resources created declaratively by either kubectl create --save-config or kubectl apply. The missing annotation will be patched automatically.
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/miniojobs.job.min.io configured
```

Author: Need to sort out order of operations here. This is probably because no PV exists yet?

>       kubectl apply -k github.com/minio/operator\?ref=|operator-version-stable|

Author: arg typo 👍🏻

   The output resembles the following:

   .. code-block:: shell

      namespace/minio-operator created
      customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/miniojobs.job.min.io created
      customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/policybindings.sts.min.io created
      customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/tenants.minio.min.io created
      serviceaccount/console-sa created
      serviceaccount/minio-operator created
      clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/console-sa-role created
      clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/minio-operator-role created
      clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/console-sa-binding created
      clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/minio-operator-binding created
      configmap/console-env created
      secret/console-sa-secret created
      service/console created
      service/operator created
      service/sts created
      deployment.apps/console created
      deployment.apps/minio-operator created

>    Verify the Operator pods are running:

Reviewer: Should this be a numbered step?
```suggestion
#. Verify the Operator pods are running:
```

Author: I hadn't thought of it that way, but a good idea 👍🏻

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      kubectl get pods -n minio-operator

   The output resembles the following:

   .. code-block:: shell

      NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
      console-6b6cf8946c-9cj25          1/1     Running   0          99s
      minio-operator-69fd675557-lsrqg   1/1     Running   0          99s

   In this example, the ``minio-operator`` pod is MinIO Operator and the ``console`` pod is the Operator Console.

   You can modify your Operator deplyoment by applying Kustomize patches.
   You can find examples for common configurations in the `Operator GitHub repository <https://github.com/minio/operator/tree/master/examples/kustomization>`__.

> #. (Optional) Configure access to the Operator Console port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. *(Optional)* Configure access to the Operator Console port
```

Author: oh yes and changed the Helm page to match

      service/operator   ClusterIP   10.43.44.204    <none>        4221/TCP            25h
      service/sts        ClusterIP   10.43.70.4      <none>        4223/TCP            25h

      NAME                             READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
      deployment.apps/console          1/1     1            1           25h
      deployment.apps/minio-operator   2/2     2            2           25h

      NAME                                        DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
      replicaset.apps/console-68d955874d          1         1         1       25h
      replicaset.apps/minio-operator-699f797b8b   2         2         2       25h

#. Retrieve the Operator Console JWT for login

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: Secret
      metadata:
        name: console-sa-secret
        namespace: minio-operator
        annotations:
          kubernetes.io/service-account.name: console-sa
      type: kubernetes.io/service-account-token
      EOF
      SA_TOKEN=$(kubectl -n minio-operator  get secret console-sa-secret -o jsonpath="{.data.token}" | base64 --decode)
      echo $SA_TOKEN

   

> #. Log into the MinIO Operator Console

Author: Not sure if all these different methods are really necessary. Perhaps reduce it to "according to your local policies" and NodePort.

Reviewer: You could use tabs if you want to have all three available, with NodePorts selected, since that's what you used earlier in the tutorial.

That's
```
:selected:
```
for the tab to have it shown by default. It can be second in the list or whatever.

Reviewer: Actually, I think tabs would be really good here.

>    If you configured the ``svc/console`` service for access through ingress, a cluster load balancer, you can access the Console using the configured hostname and port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you configured the ``svc/console`` service for access through ingress or a cluster load balancer, you can access the Console using the configured hostname and port.
```

   If you configured the service for access through NodePorts, specify the hostname of any worker node in the cluster with that port as ``HOSTNAME:NODEPORT`` to access the Console.

>    For example, a deployment configured with a NodePort of 30090 and the following ``INTERNAL-IP`` IP addresses can be accessed at ``http://172.18.0.2:30090``.

Reviewer: The double `IP` seems weird. Up to you.

```suggestion
   For example, a deployment configured with a NodePort of 30090 and the following ``INTERNAL-IP`` addresses can be accessed at ``http://172.18.0.2:30090``.
```

Author: 👍🏻  and I just reworked this anyway

   
   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

>       $ kubectl get nodes -o wide

Author: maybe there's a better way to find the IP addresses, this command is pretty verbose

Author: found an alternative whose output is easier to read

.. _minio-k8s-deploy-operator-kustomize:

==============================
Deploy Operator With Kustomize
==============================

.. default-domain:: minio

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

> `Kustomize <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization>`__ is a YAML-based templating tool that allows you to define Operator and Tenant templates using plain Kubernetes YAML reference language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Kustomize <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization>`__ is a YAML-based templating tool that allows you to define Kubernetes resources in a declarative and repeatable fashion.
```

Kustomize is included with the `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/>`__ command line tool.

The `default MinIO Operator Kustomize template <https://github.com/minio/operator/blob/master/kustomization.yaml>`__ provides a starting point for customizing configurations for your local environment.

> You can modify a Kustomize Operator deployment after installation with kubectl patches, which are additional YAML configurations applied over the existing base.

Reviewer 2: I think you can even include thoes patches within `kustomization.yaml`, so maybe

```suggestion
You can modify that Kustomization file *or* apply your own custom `patches <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6902>`__ to customize the Operator deployment for your Kubernetes cluster.
```

I think there might be a sphinxy way to do the RFC reference, not sure.

Author: Huh did not know this was a standard outside k8s 👍🏻

Reviewer 2: FWIW I was flummoxed until I realised _why_ the K8s docs kept referencing externally for literally any guidance on how to use this.

Prerequisites
-------------

> To install the Operator with Kustomize you will need the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Installing the Operator with Kustomize requires you meet the following prerequisites:
```

Just to drop the passive.

* An existing Kubernetes cluster, v1.21 or later.

> * The ``kubectl`` CLI tool on your local host, the same version as the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A local ``kubectl`` installation with the same version as the cluster.
```

> * `Docker <https://docker.com>`__ for your platform.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: does the local host need docker?

Author: 🤔 a good point. My setup uses it. But that doesn't really mean much, does it.

* Access to run ``kubectl`` commands on the cluster from your local host.

For more about Operator installation requirements, including TLS certificates, see the :ref:`Operator deployment prerequisites <minio-operator-prerequisites>`.

This procedure assumes familiarity with the referenced Kubernetes concepts and utilities.
While this documentation may provide guidance for configuring or deploying Kubernetes-related resources on a best-effort basis, it is not a replacement for the official :kube-docs:`Kubernetes Documentation <>`.

.. _minio-k8s-deploy-operator-kustomize-repo:

Install the MinIO Operator using Kustomize
------------------------------------------

The following procedure uses ``kubectl -k`` to install the Operator from the MinIO Operator GitHub repository.
``kubectl -k`` and ``kubectl --kustomize`` are aliases that perform the same command.

.. important::

>    If you use Kustomize to install the Operator, you must use Kustomize to manage that installation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you use Kustomize to install the Operator, you must use Kustomize to manage or update that installation.
```

      clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/console-sa-binding created
      clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/minio-operator-binding created
      configmap/console-env created
      secret/console-sa-secret created
      service/console created
      service/operator created
      service/sts created
      deployment.apps/console created
      deployment.apps/minio-operator created

#. Verify the Operator pods are running:

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      kubectl get pods -n minio-operator

   The output resembles the following:

   .. code-block:: shell

      NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
      console-6b6cf8946c-9cj25          1/1     Running   0          99s
      minio-operator-69fd675557-lsrqg   1/1     Running   0          99s

   In this example, the ``minio-operator`` pod is MinIO Operator and the ``console`` pod is the Operator Console.

   You can modify your Operator deplyoment by applying kubectl patches.
   You can find examples for common configurations in the `Operator GitHub repository <https://github.com/minio/operator/tree/master/examples/kustomization>`__.

> #. *(Optional)* Configure access to the Operator Console port

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. *(Optional)* Configure access to the Operator Console service
```

   If needed, configure access to the Operator Console port.

>    Depending on your local policies, this could be a Kubernetes load balancer, ingress, or similar control plane component that enables external access.

Reviewer 2: The Operator Console service does not automatically bind or expose itself for external access on the Kubernetes cluster.
You must instead configure a network control plane component, such as a load balancer or ingress, to grant that external access.

Author: added to Helm page also

>    For testing purposes, you can access Operator Console by configuring a NodePort using the following patch:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   For testing purposes or short-term access, expose the Operator Console service through a NodePort using the following patch:
```

Author: Should probably change this in the Helm page also

   .. code-block:: shell
      :class: copyable

      kubectl patch service -n minio-operator console -p '
      {
          "spec": {
              "ports": [
                  {
                      "name": "http",
                      "port": 9090,
                      "protocol": "TCP",
                      "targetPort": 9090,
                      "nodePort": 30090
                  },
                  {
                      "name": "https",
                      "port": 9443,
                      "protocol": "TCP",
                      "targetPort": 9443,
                      "nodePort": 30433
                  }
              ],
              "type": "NodePort"
          }
      }'

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

You can now access the service through port ``30433`` on any of your Kubernetes worker nodes.
